In this lesson we'll be talking about
how to list the running processes or
running programs and commands.
We'll take about the difference between
foreground and background processes and
how to manipulate those.
We'll also talk about
how to kill processes.
To display the currently running
processes use the ps command.
If no options are specified,
ps displays the processes associated
with your current session.
To see every process including
ones that are not owned or
running as you, use ps with a -e option.
The -f option will give you more
information and a full format listing.
To see processes running as
a specific user, use ps-u username.
And to display more information about
a specific process, use it's PID, or
it's Process Identification number,
ps -p pid.
Here are some common ps
commands that you could use.
ps -e to display all the processes.
ps -ef to give you a full
listing of all the processes.
There's a couple of different ways to
display processes in a tree like output,
ps -eH, or -e --forest option.
Again, to display a specific user's
process, use ps -u that username.
There are other ways to view processes and
running commands on a system.
You can use the pstree command,
it displays processes in a tree format.
You can use top,
which is an interactive process viewer.
Or you can use htop.
htop is less common than top so it may or
may not be included in
your Linux distribution.
To see a list of processes that
are associated with your session, type ps.
And you can see that I only have
two processes, the bash process,
which is my shell, and ps,
which I ran to get the list of processes.
If we want to look at a specific process,
we can use -p and
supply a PID or a Process ID.
So let's look at 1530.
And that will only list
that one specific process.
To get a full listing, we can use a -f and
that will tell us some more information.
We can do a -e for all the processes.
And -ef for a full listing.
And let's pipe this to less.
Then you can see the information
that it's displaying.
The user or UID,
that the process is running as, the PID,
the process ID, the PPID,
which is the parent process ID, and
you have some more information about
what time it started and command name.
If you wanna get a full process listing of
a specific user, you can use this command.
We'll use, me.
Or we could use, say, the root user.
Let's look at this
output in a tree format.
That's another way to do that.
Here's an example of the pstree command.
Let's look at the top command.
And it places the processes that are using
the most CPU resources at the top of
the list.
And type a question mark for help.
I'll type q to exit here.
Can also look at this program called htop.
It gives you the same information as top,
but just in a slightly different format.
Up until this point,
all the commands you have been executing
have been running in the foreground.
When a command, process, or
program is running in the foreground,
the shell prompt will not be
displayed until that process exits.
For long-running programs, it can be
convenient to send them to the background.
Processes that are backgrounded still
execute and perform their tasks.
However, they do not block you
from entering further commands at
the shell prompt.
To start a process in the background,
place an ampersand at
the end of the command.
To kill the current foreground process,
hold down the ctrl key and
press the letter c.
To suspend the process, type Ctrl+z.
That will stop the process.
A process that is suspended is
not running in the background.
It is actually stopped.
To send a suspended process to
the background use the bg command.
You can background a specific job number
by proceeding it with a percent sign for
example %3.
If you don't supply a job number bg
will operate on the current job.
The current job is considered to be the
last job that was stopped while it was in
the foreground, or the last job
that was started in the background.
To foreground a background process,
type fg.
Like bg,
fg with operate on the current job unless
you give it a specific job number.
To kill a job, type the word kill,
space, percent, and the job number.
Kill requires that you give a job
number or a process ID number.
To list your jobs, type the jobs command.
There are two ways to
kill a running process.
If the process is running in the
foreground simply type Ctrl+c to kill it.
The other way to kill a process
is with the kill command.
You can run kill by just
supplying the PID or process id.
You can also specify a signal
to send to the process.
The default signal used
by kill is termination.
You'll see this signal referred
to as SIGTERM, or TERM for short.
Signals have numbers that
correspond to their names.
The default TERM signal is number 15.
So running kill 123 is the same
as running kill -15 123,
or kill -TERM 123.
If a process does not terminate
when you send it the TERM signal,
use the kill signal which is number 9.
Let's start a program in the background.
To do that we'll end the command
line with an ampersand.
So when a command is run background,
two numbers are displayed.
The number in brackets is the job number,
and
that can be referenced by
preceding it with a percent sign.
The second number is the PID.
So if we run ps -p,
we'll give it the PID of 2373,
we'll see that long-running
process command.
Type jobs, you'll see that 1 is
the job number for number one.
You can also reference it by %1.
We'll run the foreground command to
bring this job to the foreground.
And to kill the foreground
process we can type Ctrl+c.
And that has stopped our process.
So let's start multiple
jobs in the background.
Type the jobs command here.
The plus sign in the jobs output
represents the current job,
while the minus sign
represents the previous job.
The current job is considered
to be the last job that was
stopped while it was in the foreground, or
the last job started in the background.
If no information is supplied to the fg or
bg commands,
then the current job is operated upon.
The current job can be explicitly
referred to by %% or %+.
The previous job can be referred to by %-.
For instance, we can run jobs,
that one, this way.
Or to look at the previous job,
you could run this command.
To bring a job back to the foreground,
we can type fg and a job number.
Let's bring job number
2 to the foreground.
And then from here, we can say kill it.
And I'll just hit the.
I'll see if that works, and then yes.
Now we have jobs number 1, 3, and 4.
Let's bring job number
1 to the foreground.
And we can suspend it by typing Ctrl+z.
Type our jobs output and
we can see one is stopped.
It's not in the background,
it is actually stopped.
It's not doing any work.
If we want to send it to the background,
type bg and then %1.
Now jobs 1, 3, and
4 are running in the background.
Let's kill a job by job number.
Let's kill job 1.
And then you'll notice
that it's terminated.
Let's just foreground job number 3.
And again you don't have to supply fg,
you can just simple use the job number.
Let's take a look at
the kill command real quick.
Let's do a kill -l to list all
the signals that we can send a process.
Again, kill defaults to
signal 15 which is SIGTERM.
And a hard to kill process, you would
want to use kill -9 or kill -KILL.
For our process.
Let's start a couple of jobs here.
Let's use kill 2394, cuz that's the PID.
See what happens.
Yep, that terminated our job.
We can also use,
let's do a kill-9 for 2396,
and sure enough that
killed that job as well.
To display information about
running processes and programs,
use the ps command.
To see all the processes running on
a system with a full listing us ps -ef.
To look at a process for a given user
use ps -u followed by the account name.
To kill a process that's in
the foreground type Ctrl+c.
To suspend a foreground process,
type Ctrl+z.
To background that process type bg, and to
foreground a process use the fg command.
To display information about your
running jobs, use the jobs command.
You can use the kill command to kill jobs
by job number with the percent sign.
Or you can kill programs and
processes by PID.